Ing Cancer metung yang clasing sakit nung nu e ya apigilan ing pangadake ning cell at ing kayang pangakalat, kapamilatan ning pangaragul da ring tissue kapamilatan da ring "pamaglusub" o pangasaksak karing mangalaut a karinan a ausan dang metastasis (nung nu deng cancer cells mililipat la kapamilatan ning agusdaya o kaya keng kulinyayan). Agiang nanu ya idad ing tau malyari yang miki cancer, dapot darakal la tsansa deng tutua. Iti ing metung kareng sangkan ning pangamate kareng mealkus a bangsa. Pekakaraniwan cancer karing matuang babai idad 65 o patas yapin ing breast cancer samantalang prostate cancer ne man karing lalaking parehong idad.


== Lawen ya rin ==

American Cancer Society
National Comprehensive Cancer Network
Alcohol and cancer
Diet and cancer
Oncology
List of oncology-related terms
American Association for Cancer Research
European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)
World Cancer Day - Pebreru 4


== Dalerayan ==


=== General references ===
The Basic Science of Oncology. Tannock IF, Hill RP et al (eds) 4th ed.2005 McGraw-Hill.
Principles of Cancer Biology. Kleinsmith, LJ (2006). Pearson Benjamin Cummings.
A Special Message to Cancer Patients Seeking "Alternative" Treatments. Retrieved on 2005-12-16.
Parkin D, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. "Global cancer statistics, 2002.". CA Cancer J Clin 55 (2):  74-108. PMID. Full text


== Suglung Palwal ==


=== Professional at dalerayan ===
American Cancer Society Homepage
American Cancer Society resources on clinical trials What to look for in clinical trials and how to find open trials.
/ The Leukemia and Lymphoma Society
American Cancer Society Treatment Decision Tools – Trusted tools for helping patients make informed decisions
American Association for Cancer Research A non-profit organization supporting advances in the knowledge of causes, diagnosis, treatment and prevention of cancer.
The World Health Organisation's cancer site A review of worldwide strategies for the prevention and treatment of cancer.
World Health Organization's fact sheet on cancer
National Cancer Institute US Government agency responsible for conducting and supporting research, training, health information dissemination, and other programs with respect to the cause, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of cancer, rehabilitation from cancer, and the continuing care of cancer patients and the families of cancer patients.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network - Free guidelines for professionals and many pages of quality information for patients with all types of cancers
The Institute of Cancer Research One of the world’s foremost independent cancer research organisations, based in the United Kingdom.
EORTC European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer. A European non-profit organization that sets up and executes clinical trials.
International Society for Biological Therapy of Cancer Society of medical professionals committed to investigating, developing and utilizing biologicals and biological therapy for the treatment of malignant disease.
National Cancer Institute of Canada Longest-standing Canadian research organization devoted to advancing cancer control.
Cancer Facts & Figures 2005 - 2005 United States Cancer Statistics

Canadian Cancer Statistics 2006 Archived Pebreru 3, 2007 at the Wayback Machine - This publication reports cancer incidence and mortality in Canada, analyzed by gender, age and province/territory.
Cancer Medicine, 6th Edition Textbook
New Scientist (2006). Everything you wanted to know about cancer. New Scientist.
Diet, Nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases (including cancer) by a Joint WHO/FAO Expert consultation (2003). Summary by GreenFacts.
Virtual Cancer Centre - information resource with the latest cancerous diseases news by professionals of Oncology, Haematology, Radiation Oncology and Palliative Care.