An World Wide Web (WWW) asya an usa ka sistema hin mga sumpay-sumpay nga mga dokumento ha sulod han Internet. Ha pamaagi han web browser, puydi mabilngan an dirudilain nga mga pulong, imahe ngan tingog ha pinaagi han hyperlink.


== Pinanbasaran ==


== Padugang nga barasahon ==

Berners-Lee, Tim; Bray, Tim; Connolly, Dan; Cotton, Paul; Fielding, Roy; Jeckle, Mario; Lilley, Chris; Mendelsohn, Noah; Orchard, David; Walsh, Norman; Williams, Stuart (15 Disyembre 2004). "Architecture of the World Wide Web, Volume One". Version 20041215. W3C. CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Fielding, R.; Gettys, J.; Mogul, J.; Frystyk, H.; Masinter, L.; Leach, P.; Berners-Lee, T. (Hunyo 1999). "Hypertext Transfer Protocol – HTTP/1.1". Request For Comments 2616. Information Sciences Institute. CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Niels Brügger, ed. Web History (2010) 362 pages; Historical perspective on the World Wide Web, including issues of culture, content, and preservation.
Polo, Luciano (2003). "World Wide Web Technology Architecture: A Conceptual Analysis". New Devices. 
Skau, H.O. (Marso 1990). "The World Wide Web and Health Information". New Devices. 


== Mga sumpay ha gawas ==

The first website
Early archive of the first Web site
Internet Statistics: Growth and Usage of the Web and the Internet
Living Internet Ginhipos 7 Enero 2009 han Wayback Machine A comprehensive history of the Internet, including the World Wide Web.
Web Design and Development ngada ha Open Directory Project
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
W3C Recommendations Reduce "World Wide Wait"
World Wide Web Size Daily estimated size of the World Wide Web.
Antonio A. Casilli, Some Elements for a Sociology of Online Interactions Ginhipos 1 Mayo 2011 han Wayback Machine
The Erdős Webgraph Server Ginhipos 1 Marso 2021 han Wayback Machine offers weekly updated graph representation of a constantly increasing fraction of the WWW.
The 25th Anniversary of the World Wide Web Ginhipos 11 Hulyo 2021 han Wayback Machine is an animated video produced by USAID and TechChange which explores the role of the WWW in addressing extreme poverty.