Publius Ovidius Naso, jiske English waala des me, jaada kar ke Ovid ke naam se jaana jaawat rahaa, Ancient Roman ke ek poet rahaa. Uske janam 20 March 43 BC me Sulmona, Italy me bhaes rahaa. Aaj kal ke log soche hae ki uu 17 AD nai to 18 AD ke maraa. 


== Kaam ==


== Dusra websites ==

University of Virginia, "Ovid Illustrated: The Renaissance Reception of Ovid in Image and Text"
Template:Gutenberg author
Latin and English translation
Perseus/Tufts: P. Ovidius Naso Amores, Ars Amatoria, Heroides (on this site called Epistulae), Metamorphoses, Remedia Amoris. Enhanced brower. Not downloadable.
Sacred Texts Archive: Ovid Archived 2012-10-22 at the Wayback Machine Amores, Ars Amatoria, Medicamina Faciei Femineae, Metamorphoses, Remedia Amoris.
The Metamorphoses of Publius Ovidius Naso Archived 2007-07-22 at the Wayback Machine; elucidated by an analysis and explanation of the fables, together with English notes, historical, mythological and critical, and illustrated by pictorial embellishments: with a dictionary, giving the meaning of all the words with critical exactness. By Nathan Covington Brooks. Publisher: New York, A. S. Barnes & co.; Cincinnati, H. W. Derby & co., 1857 (a searchable facsimile at the University of Georgia Libraries; DjVu & layered PDF Archived 2006-03-05 at the Wayback Machine format)
Original Latin only
Latin Library: Ovid Amores, Ars Amatoria, Epistulae ex Ponto, Fasti, Heroides, Ibis, Metamorphoses, Remedia Amoris, Tristia.
Gutenberg Project: Fasti Archived 2004-10-09 at the Wayback Machine With introduction and extensive notes in English by Thomas Keightley. Plain text version.
Works by Ovid
English translation only
New translations by A. S. Kline Amores, Ars Amatoria, Epistulae ex Ponto, Fasti, Heroides, Ibis, Medicamina Faciei Femineae, Metamorphoses, Remedia Amoris, Tristia with enhanced browsing facility, downloadable in HTML, PDF, or MS Word DOC formats. Site also includes wide selection of works by other authors.
Two translations from Ovid's Amores by Jon Corelis. Archived 2012-12-08 at archive.today
English translations of Ovid's Amores with introductory essay and notes by Jon Corelis
Some English translations of Ovid by famous literary figures
Commentary
Perseus/Tufts: Commentary on the Heroides of Ovid


== References ==