Mahabharata, yaani ki barraa India, purana India ke dui lamba khissa (epic) me se ek hae. Duusra hae Ramayana. Mahabharata ke Hindustani rishi, Vyasa, compose karis rahaa. Ii bhi biswas karaa jaawe hae ki bhagwan Ganesh iske likhis rahaa jab ki Vyasa iske batais rahaa. Isme 110,000 couplets, 18 hissa me hae. Ek 19th hissa,jiske naam Harivamsha hai, bhi hae. Bhagavad Gita, Krishna aur Arjuna ke biich me baat hae , aur ii Mahabharata ke ek hissa hae.
Rishi Vyas aapan larrka, Suka aur students ke Mahabharat parrhais. 


== Kuru family tree ==

Key to Symbols

Male:  blue border
Female:  red border 
Pandavas:  green box 
Kauravas:  yellow box 
Notes

a: Santanu was a king of the Kuru dynasty or kingdom, and was some generations removed from any ancestor called Kuru. His marriage to Ganga preceded his marriage to Satyavati.
b: Pandu and Dhritarashtra were fathered by Vyasa after Vichitravirya's death. Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura were the sons of Vyasa with Ambika, Ambalika and a maid servant respectively.
c: Karna was born to Kunti through her invocation of Surya, before her marriage to Pandu.
d: Yudhishtira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva were acknowledged sons of Pandu but were begotten by Kunti's invocation of various deities. They all married Draupadi (not shown in tree).
e: Duryodhana and his siblings were born at the same time, and they were of the same generation as their Pandava cousins.
The birth order of siblings is correctly shown in the family tree (from left to right), except for Vyasa and Bhishma whose birth order is not described, and Vichitravirya who was born after them. The fact that Ambika and Ambalika are sisters is not shown in the family tree. The birth of Duryodhana took place after the birth of Karna, Yudhishtira and Bhima, but before the birth of the remaining Pandava brothers.
Some siblings of the characters shown here have been left out for clarity; these include ChitrÄngada, the eldest brother of Vichitravirya. Vidura, half-brother to Dhritarashtra and Pandu.


== India ke sanskriti pe asar ==
Bhagavad Git me Krishna, Arjuna ke ii samjhaae hae ki ek warrior aur prince ke kon duty hae aur dherYoga ke baare me aur Veda ke baare me ke  philosophies ke samjhaae hae. Isse Gita  banaa, jisse Hindu sahitiye ke ek chhota guide batawa jaawe hae. . Aajkal ke jamana me , Swami Vivekananda, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Mahatma Gandhi aur dher aur jane Gita ke kaam me laae ke India ke ajaadi ke struggle me kaam me laain rahin.


== Aur jaankari ==
MahabharataOnline - The Complete Translation of Vyasa Mahabharata and Stories from Mahabharata
The Mahabharata >> 18 Parvas in English
Some nice info on Hinduism including the Mahabharata


== References ==