Sēo Gandis Ēa (Ganga on Indiscum sprǣcum) is fyrst ēa in norðernum Indie. Heo aginneþ sƿa Bhagirathi ēa fram the Gangotri Glacier in the Uttaranchal Caucasus and joins the Alaknanda nēah Deoprayag to form Gandis. Then on, Gandis flēoƿeþ ofer Norþernan Indie miclan ƿangum (þāra Gandisƿangum) and empties in Bengal Byhte æfter dividing up into many distributaries. One of them is the Hoogli Ēa nēah Caligardamana, another major distributary being the Padma Ēa seo flēoƿeþ in Bangladesc. Seo Ēa langness is ymbe 1,570 mīla. The region encompassing the delta near the Bengal Byht healf is known as the Sunderbans (Beorhtan Ƿealdas) – a region of thick mangrove ƿeald, and ān þæs Cynelic Bengal tigres mægena eardena.
The Geamuna Ēa — seo is self miclu ēa, and nearly as sacred — is an brōcrīþ þǣre Gandis, and hiere mōtung is nēah what is the site of the traditional holy Hindu ceaster Prayag, seo man nū hēt Allahabad. 
Man mæg tƿa cynn mereswīn in Gandis ēa sēon; þæt Gandis Ēa Mereswīn and þæt Irraƿaddy Meresƿīn. Ēac is Gandis notable in that it contains a rare species of freshwater shark, Glyphis gangeticus about which little is known.


=== Gandis in Hinduisme ===

The Ganga is personified in Hinduism sƿa gyden: Ma (Mother) Ganga, Karttikeya mōdor, be Agni. 
Several places sacred to Hindus lie along the banks of the river Ganga, including Haridwar and Varanasi. It is believed that taking a dip in the river will wash away one's sins, and that having one's ashes disposed off in the Ganga after death may improve one's next life or even allow Moksha to be attained sooner. Devout Hindus make pilgrimages to bathe in the Ganga and to meditate on its banks.
Æfter þǣre mythologicalan gesegene, Brahma collected the sweat of Vishnu's feet and created Ganga. Being touched by two members of the Trimurthi, Ganga became very holy. 
Several years later, a king named Sagar magically acquired sixty thousand sons. One day, King Sagar performed a ritual of worship for the good of the Kingdom. One of the integral parts of the ritual was eoh, which was stolen by the jealous Indra. Sagar sent all his sons all geond eall Middangeard to search for the horse. They found it in the Underworld next to a penitent sage. Believing that the sage had stolen the horse, they hurled insults at him and caused his penance to be disturbed. The sage opened his eyes for the first time in several years, and looked at the sons of Sagar. With this glance, all sixty thousand were burnt to death. 
Þā sāƿla þāra suna Sagares wandered as gāstas forþǣm þe hiera endmestan rites had not been performed. When Bhagiratha, one of the descendants of Sagar by a second wife, learnt of this fate, he vowed to bring Ganga down to Earth so that she could sweep away the ashes to heaven.
Bhagiratha prayed to Brahma that Ganga come down to Earth. Brahma agreed, and he ordered Ganga to come down to the Earth and then on to the Underworld so that the souls of Bhagiratha's ancestors would be able to go to Heaven. The vain Ganga felt that this was insulting and decided to sweep the whole Earth away as she fell from the Heavens. Alarmed, Bhagiratha prayed to Shiva that he break up Ganga's descent.
Ganga arrogantly fell on Shiva's head. But Shiva calmly trapped her in his hair and let her out in small streams. The touch of Shiva further sanctified Ganga. As Ganga travelled to the Underworld, she created a different stream to remain on Earth to help purify unfortunate souls there.


=== Sēo ēac ===
Gandis Delta
Gandis Fūlness
Ganges Casino
Bollywood Casino Archived 2007-10-14 at the Wayback Machine