I Dante Alighieri (May/June c.1265 – Septiember 14, 1321), kebaluan bilang  Dante, metung yang Italianung watas (poet) ning Middle Ages. 
Ing lagiung  Dante metung yang, agpang kareng amanu nang Jacopo Alighieri, metung a  hypocorism para kang  Durante. 


== Dalerayan ==


== Dagdag pamamasa ==
Gardner, Edmund Garratt (1921). Dante, London, Pub. for the British academy by H. Milford, Oxford University Press.
Hede, Jesper. (2007). Reading Dante: The Pursuit of Meaning. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Raffa, Guy P. (2009). The Complete Danteworlds: A Reader's Guide to the Divine Comedy. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226702704. 
Scott, John A. (1996). Dante's Political Purgatory, Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.
Seung, T. K. (1962). The Fragile Leaves of the Sibyl: Dante's Master Plan. Westminster, MD: Newman Press.
Toynbee, Paget (1898) A Dictionary of the Proper Names and Notable Matters in the Works of Dante. London, The Clarendon Press.
Whiting, Mary Bradford (1922). Dante the Man and the Poet. Cambridge, England. W. Heffer & Sons, ltd.


== Suglung Palual ==
Template:Literature Portal

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Biography, on his works and bibliography
The World of Dante multimedia, texts, maps, gallery, searchable database, music, teacher resources, timeline
Multimedia
The Princeton Dante Project Archived Juniu 3, 2009 at the Wayback Machine texts and multimedia
The Dartmouth Dante Project searchable database of commentary
Società Dantesca Italiana (bilingual site) manuscripts of works, images and text transcripts
"Digital Dante" – Divine Comedy with commentary, other works, scholars on Dante
Works Italian and Latin texts, concordances and frequency lists
Deng obrang gewa nang o tungkul kang Dante Alighieri kareng aklatan (WorldCat catalog)
Works by Dante Alighieri at Project Gutenberg
"The Earth is Round! The Image of the Earth in the Middle Ages"- Animated Short 
Template:Dante
Template:Catholicism
Template:History of the Roman Catholic Church
Template:Roman Catholic Theology