Aurelius Augustinus, Augustine of Hippo, or Saint Augustine (November 13, 354 – August 28, 430) was one of the most important figures in the development of Western Christianity. In Roman Catholicism, he is a saint and pre-eminent Doctor of the Church, and the patron of the Augustinian religious order. Many Protestants, especially Calvinists, consider him to be one of the theological fountainheads of Reformation teaching on salvation and grace. He is also considered a saint by the Orthodox Churches. Born in Africa as the eldest son of Saint Monica, he was educated in Rome and baptized in Milan. His works—including The Confessions, which is often called the first Western autobiography—are still read around the world.


== External links ==

General:
At UPENN: Texts, translations, introductions, commentaries... Archived Oktubri 22, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
EarlyChurch.org.uk Extensive bibliography and on-line articles.
Life of St. Augustine of Hippo, from the Catholic Encyclopedia
Texts by Augustine:
Works by Augustine of Hippo at Project Gutenberg
In Latin, at The Latin Library: books and letters by Augustine
At "Christian Classics Ethereal Library" Translations of several works by Augustine, incl. introductions
At "New Advent": Several works by Augustine in English, incl. introduction
The Enchiridion by Augustine
[1] Full Latin and Italian text resource
At "IntraText Digital Library": Works by Augustine in several languages, with concordance and frequency list
Texts on Augustine:
St. Augustine: Between Two Worlds
Augustine and 'other Catholics' Archived Nobyembri 1, 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
"Augustine's Concept of Freedom: The Dynamic of Sin and Grace" from Grace Incarnate (1989) Archived Agostu 29, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
Augustine's Heavenly City and the Western MindPgs 22-24
On Music
Augustine on Hymns Archived Nobyembri 16, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
On Original Sin
Augustine and Pelagius
Augustine and Thomas Aquinas on Original Sin Archived Setyembri 19, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
Original sin: a disputation
The Cambridge Companion to Augustine; 3 Augustine on evil and original sin  Archived Nobyembri 18, 2007 at the Wayback Machine
Links to the Augustinian Order
Augustine's writings Archived Agostu 24, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
Manuscripts that refer to his relationship with a woman of high intellectual calibre (This may or may not be true)
Letter To St Augustine Of Hippo Archived Juniu 16, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
Audio books
City of God, Confessions, Enchiridion, Doctrine Archived Marsu 9, 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Augustine and Orthodoxy
Blessed Augustine of Hippo: His Place in the Orthodox Church
St. Augustine in the Greek Orthodox Tradition Archived Setyembri 22, 2008 at the Wayback Machine