Hi Charles Robert Darwin (12 Pebrero 1809 – 19 Abril 1882) amo an usa ka Ingles nga naturalista syentipiko nga nagpahimatuod ngan naglatag hin mga kasarigan nga ngatanan nga kinabuhi nagtikang ha kapareho nga tinikangan (ebolusyon), pamaagi han tinatawag niya nga pagpili natural.


== Mga reperensya ==


== Mga sumpay ha gawas ==

The Complete Works of Charles Darwin Online – Darwin Online; Darwin's publications, private papers and bibliography, supplementary works including biographies, obituaries and reviews
Darwin Correspondence Project Full text and notes for complete correspondence to 1867, with summaries of all the rest
Darwin-Hooker letters, images and text jointly published at Cambridge Digital Library and Darwin Correspondence Project Ginhipos 11 Hulyo 2014 han Wayback Machine
Works by Charles Darwin at Project Gutenberg; public domain
Darwin Manuscript Project
Works by Charles Darwin in audio format from LibriVox
Video and radio clips Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
Charles Darwin ngada ha Open Directory Project
Works by or about Charles Darwin in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
Archival material relating to Charles Darwin listed at the UK National Archives
A Pictorial Biography of Charles Darwin Ginhipos 5 Hulyo 2014 han Wayback Machine
Mis-portrayal of Darwin as a Racist
Google Map of Charles Darwin’s Voyage of the Beagle 1832-1836 Ginhipos 25 Enero 2015 han Wayback Machine
Darwin's Volcano – a short video discussing Darwin and Agassiz' coral reef formation debate
 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Darwin, Charles Robert" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
 The life and times of Charles Darwin, an audio slideshow, The Guardian, Thursday 12 February 2009, (3 min 20 sec).
Darwin's Brave New World – A 3 part drama-documentary exploring Charles Darwin and the significant contributions of his colleagues Joseph Hooker, Thomas Huxley and Alfred Russel Wallace also featuring interviews with Richard Dawkins, David Suzuki, Jared Diamond
A naturalist's voyage around the world Account of the Beagle voyage using animation, in English from Centre national de la recherche scientifique
Anonymous (1873). Cartoon portraits and biographical sketches of men of the day. Illustrated by Waddy, Frederick. London: Tinsley Brothers. pp. 6–7. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Cartoon_portraits_and_biographical_sketches_of_men_of_the_day/C._R._Darwin,_F.R.S.. Ginkuhà 28 Disyembre 2010. 
View books owned and annotated by Charles Darwin at the online Biodiversity Heritage Library.
Digitised Darwin Manuscripts in Cambridge Digital Library