Gabriel José de la Concordia García Márquez, jiske Gabo ke naam se bhi jaana jaawe hae, (6 March, 1927 Aracataca, Colombia - 17 April, 2014, Mexico City, Mexico) ke ek novelist, short-story writer, aur journalist hae jon ki 1982 me Nobel Prize jiitis rahaa. 


=== Jawani ke din ===

Gabriel García Márquez ke janam 6 March 1927 ke Aracataca, Colombia me bhais rahaa. Uske oitaji ke naam, Gabriel Eligio García aur maiya ke naam Luisa Santiaga Márquez rahaa. García Márquez ke janam ke kuchh din baad, uske pitaji ek pharmacist ban gais. January 1929 me uske mai-baap Baranquilla chal diin jab ki García Marquez Aracataca me rahe gae. Marquez ke uske maternal grandparents, Doña Tranquilina Iguarán aur Colonel Nicolás Ricardo Márquez Mejía paal ke barra karin. Jab uu aath saal ke rahaa, tab uske naana mar gais aur uu aapan mai-baap ke ghar Barranquilla me jaae ke rahe lagaa.
García Márquez ke mai-baap ke saathe uu aapan jindagi ke suruu me nai rahaa, aur ii kaaran se uske naana , naani ke influence uske jindagi pe jaada rahaa. Uske naana, jiske uu "Papalelo" bolat rahaa, was a Liberal veteran of the Thousand Days War. The Colonel was considered a hero by Colombian Liberals and was highly respected. He was well-known for his refusal to remain silent about the banana massacres that took place the year García Márquez was born. The Colonel, whom García Márquez has described as his "umbilical cord with history and reality", was also an excellent storyteller. He taught García Márquez lessons from the dictionary, took him to the circus each year, and was the first to introduce his grandson to ice—a "miracle" found at the United Fruit Company store. He would also occasionally tell his young grandson "You can't imagine how much a dead man weighs", reminding him that there was no greater burden than to have killed a man, a lesson that García Márquez would later integrate into his novels.
García Márquez's political and ideological views were shaped by his grandfather's stories. In an interview, García Márquez told his friend Plinio Apuleyo Mendoza, "my grandfather the Colonel was a Liberal. My political ideas probably came from him to begin with because, instead of telling me fairy tales when I was young, he would regale me with horrifying accounts of the last civil war that free-thinkers and anti-clerics waged against the Conservative government." This influenced his political views and his literary technique so that "in the same way that his writing career initially took shape in conscious opposition to the Colombian literary status quo, García Márquez's socialist and anti-imperialist views are in principled opposition to the global status quo dominated by the United States".
García Márquez's grandmother, Doña Tranquilina Iguarán Cotes, played an equally influential role in his upbringing. He was inspired by the way she "treated the extraordinary as something perfectly natural." The house was filled with stories of ghosts and premonitions, omens and portents, all of which were studiously ignored by her husband. According to García Márquez she was "the source of the magical, superstitious and supernatural view of reality". He enjoyed his grandmother's unique way of telling stories. No matter how fantastic or improbable her statements, she always delivered them as if they were the irrefutable truth. It was a deadpan style that, some thirty years later, heavily influenced her grandson's most popular novel, One Hundred Years of Solitude.


=== Nobel Prize ===
1982 me uske Literature ke khatie Nobel ke prize dewa gais rahaa.


=== Recent Work ===
In 2002, he published the memoir Vivir para contarla, the first of a projected three-volume autobiography.


=== Film ===
García Márquez's ke kaam ke dher filam banawa gais hae.


== References ==

Fernández Leal Augusto, La vida de Máquez


== Further reading ==
Bhalla, Alok (1987). Garcia Marquez and Latin America.
Bell, Michael (1993). Gabriel García Márquez: Solitude and Solidarity.
Bloom, Harold (2007). Gabriel García Márquez (Modern Critical Views).
Bloom, Harold (2006). Gabriel García Márquez (Bloom's BioCritiques).
Bloom, Harold (2006). One Hundred Years of Solitude (Modern Critical Interpretations).
Bloom, Harold (2005). Love in the time of cholera (Modern Critical Interpretations).
Darraj, Susan (2006). Gabriel García Márquez(The great Hispanic heritage).
Fahy, Thomas (2003). Gabriel García Márquez's Love in the time of cholera : a reader's guide.
Fiddian, Robin W. (1995). García Márquez.
Fuentes, Carlos (1987). Gabriel García Márquez and the Invention of America.
Janes, Regina (1981). Gabriel García Márquez: Revolutions in Wonderland.
McGuirk, Bernard (1987). Gabriel García Márquez: New Readings.
McMurray, George R. (1977). Gabriel García Márquez.
McMurray, George R. (1987). Critical essays on Gabriel García Márquez.
McMurray, George R. (1987). Gabriel García Márquez: Life, Work, and Criticism.
McNerney, Kathleen (1989). Understanding Gabriel García Márquez.
Mellen, Joan (2000). Gabriel Garcia Márquez.
Miller, Yvette E. (1985). Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Oberhelman, Harley D. (1991). Gabriel García Márquez: A Study of the Short Fiction.
Ortega, Julio (1988). Gabriel García Márquez and the Powers of Fiction.
Oyarzún, Kemy (1984). Essays on Gabriel García Márquez.
Penuel, Arnold M. (1994). Intertextuality in García Márquez.
Pelayo, Rubén (2001). Gabriel García Márquez: A Critical Companion.
Shaw, Bradley A. (1986). Critical Perspectives on Gabriel García Márquez.
Vergara, Isabel (1998). Haunting demons : critical essays on the works of Gabriel García Márquez.
Villada, Gene (2002). Gabriel García Márquez's One hundred years of solitude : a casebook.
Williams, Raymond L. (1984). Gabriel García Márquez (Twayne's World Authors Series).


== Duusra websites ==
Ghostwriting Gabo [Memoir Piece] by David Unger at Guernica Magazine
García Márquez, Gabriel at the Open Directory Project
Garcia Marquez at The Modern Word
Oprah makes latest book club pick
Documentary 52': Gabriel Garcia Marquez
The world according Garcia Marquez [in spanish] by Piedad Bonnet - Icono Editorial