Kopi adolah minuman nan dibuek jo biji kopi panggang nan ditumbuk manjadi aluih sabalun dicampur jo aia paneh. bagi tumbuhan kopi. Kopi punyo kesan parangsang pado manusia disababkan kanduangan kafeinnyo. Hari iko, kopi marupoan ciek daripado minuman nan paliang disukoi di saluruah dunia.
Kopi partamo kali diminum di abaik kasambilan, apobilo inyo ditamui di tanah tinggi Etiopia. Dari sinan, inyo malaweh ka Mesir jo Yemen, jo di abaik ka-15, alah sampai di Armenia, Farsi, Turki, jo di utara Afrika. Dari dunia Islam pado masoyu, kopi taseba ka Itali, jo saluruah Eropah jo Amerika.


== Caliak pulo ==
Teh
Seduhan


== Rujuak-an ==


== Pautan lua ==

Coffee and caffeine health information — A collection of peer-reviewed and journal-published studies on coffee health benefits is evaluated, cited, and summarized.
Benjamin Joffe-Walt and Oliver Burkeman, The Guardian, 16 September 2005, "Coffee trail" — from the Ethiopian village of Choche to a London coffee shop.
Coffee on a Grande Scale Archived 2010-11-02 di Wayback Machine. — Article about the biology, chemistry, and physics of coffee production.
This is Coffee — Short tribute to coffee in the form of a documentary film (1961), made by the Coffee Brewing Institute. The movie includes some dos and don'ts of making "the perfect cup of coffee" and an overview of different ways to enjoy coffee throughout the world.
An Illustrated Coffee Guide Archived 2012-02-29 di Wayback Machine. — Side-by-side diagrams of a few common espresso drinks.
F. Engelmann, M.E. Dulloo, C. Astorga, S. Dussert and F. Anthony (2007). Complementary strategies for ex situ conservation of coffee (Coffea arabica L.) genetic resources. A case study in CATIE, Costa Rica. Topical reviews in Agricultural Biodiversity. Bioversity International, Rome, Italy. http://www.bioversityinternational.org/Publications/pubfile.asp?ID_PUB=1244. 
Descriptors for Coffee (Coffea spp. and Psilanthus spp.)
Italian Espresso National Institute
International Institute of Coffee Tasters Archived 2009-01-26 di Wayback Machine.
Coffee Taster, the free newsletter of the International Institute of Coffee Tasters, featuring articles on the quality of espresso, chemical and sensory analysis, market trends.
Geography of Coffee
Espresso Club UK - Blog about Coffee Machines Archived 2016-01-10 di Wayback Machine.