Carl Linnaeus (Latin miâ: Carolus Linnaeus; hôa-cho̍k miâ: Carl von Linné; 1707-nî 5-goe̍h 23 – 1778-nî 1-goe̍h 10), Sverige si̍t-bu̍t-ha̍k-ka; khí-chō hiān-tāi seng-bu̍t hun-lūi-ha̍k ê tē-ki. Oân-ná sī hiān-tāi seng-thài-ha̍k ê thài-chó· chi it.
Chham-khó siang-bêng-hoat.


== Chù-kái ==


== Chham-khó bûn-hiàn ==


== Iân-sin oa̍t-tho̍k ==


== Gōa-pō͘  liân-kiat ==

Chū-choân

Biography at the Department of Systematic Botany, University of Uppsala
Biography at The Linnean Society of London
Biography from the University of California Museum of Paleontology
A four-minute biographical video from the London Natural History Museum on YouTube
Biography from Taxonomic Literature, 2nd Edition. 1976–2009.
Chham-khó chu-liāu

von Linné tī Project Gutenberg ê chok-phín
Carolus Linnaeus tī Internet Archive ê chok-phín
The Linnean Society of London
The Linnaeus Apostles
The Linnean Collections
The Linnean Correspondence
Linnaeus' Disciples and Apostles
The Linnaean Dissertations
Linnean Herbarium
The Linnaeus Tercentenary
Works by Carl von Linné at the Biodiversity Heritage Library
Digital edition: "Critica botanica" by the University and State Library Düsseldorf
Digital edition: "Classes plantarum seu systemata plantarum" by the University and State Library Düsseldorf
Oratio de telluris habitabilis incremento Archived 2020-10-29 at the Wayback Machine. (1744) – full digital facsimile from Linda Hall Library
Kî-thaⁿ

Linnaeus was depicted by Jay Hosler in a parody of Peanuts titled "Good ol' Charlie Darwin".
The 15 March 2007 issue of Nature featured a picture of Linnaeus on the cover with the heading "Linnaeus's Legacy" and devoted a substantial portion to items related to Linnaeus and Linnaean taxonomy.
A tattoo of Linnaeus's definition of the order Primates Archived 2010-12-02 at the Wayback Machine. mentioned by Carl Zimmer
Ginkgo biloba tree at the University of Harderwijk, said to have been planted by Linnaeus in 1735
SL Magazine, Spring 2018 features an article by Nicholas Sparks, librarian, Collection Strategy and Development titled Origins of Taxonomy, describing a generous donation from the Linnean Society of NSW to supplement the State Library of New South Wales's collections on Carl Linnaeus of documents, photographs, prints and drawings as well as a fine portrait of Linnaeus painted about 1800.