Agrikultur nyaéta prosés pikeun ngahasilkeun pangan, parab, benang, jeung hasil-hasil séjén nu dipiharep tina budidaya sarupaning tutuwuhan jeung sato ingon-ingon. Agrikultur na istilah urang sarua jeung tatanén.


== Ringkesan ==
Tatanén ngawengku kana hiji sistim pikeun ngahasilkeun kabutuhan pangan boh tina pepelakan anapon sato ingon-ingon, ieu kabéh  di mimitian tina hiji tarékah pikeun yumponan pangabutuh rumah tangga sapopoé. Kiwari tatanén geus jadi salah sahiji widang penting anu jadi bahan atikan di sakola-sakola,  kumaha prak-prakan ngolah taneuh tur miarana, sangkan ngaronjat hasil sarta kauntunganna. 
Beuki ngaronjatna, kabutuhan kadaharan pikeun salian manusa ogé kadaharan sasatoan/fodder, tatanen ngahasilkeun barang-barang saperti kembang potong, jeung tatangkalan hiasan nursery, gemuk, kulit sasatoan, kulit, kimia industri (pati, éthanol, jeung plastik), benang (kapas, wol, rami, jeung linen/flax), bahan bakar (méthané, biodiésel, biomass), jeung naha meunang idin atawa henteu rupa-rupa ubar (biofarmasi, bako, marijuana, opium, cocaine). Rekayasa génétik tutuwuhan jeung sasatoan anu bisa ngahasilkeun ubar husus.

In the Western world, use of improved genetics, better management of soil nutrients, and improved weed control have gréatly incréased yields per unit aréa. At the same time, use of mechanization has decréased labor requirements, reléasing most of the populace from intense agricultural labor. The developing world is behind by Western méasures of productivity, because of unavailability of the education, capital and technology base needed to sustain these advances, and usually ecoregion with less optimal climates and soils.
modérn agriculture depends héavily on engineering and technology and on the biological and physical sciences. Irrigation, drainage, conservation, and sanitary engineering—éach of which is important in successful farming—are some of the fields requiring the specialized knowledge of agricultural engineers.
Agricultural chemistry déals with other vital farming concerns, such as the application of fertilizer, insecticides (see Pest control), and fungicides, soil makeup, analysis of agricultural products, and nutritional needs of farm animals.
Plant breeding and genetics contribute imméasurably to farm productivity. Genetics has also made a science of livestock breeding. Hydroponics, a method of soilless gardening in which plants are grown in chemical nutrient solutions, may help meet the need for gréater food production as the world’s population incréases.
The packing, processing, and marketing of agricultural products are closely related activities also influenced by science. Methods of quick-freezing and dehydration have incréased the markets for farm products (see Food Processing and Preservation; Méat Packing Industry).
Mechanization, the outstanding characteristic of late 19th- and 20th-century agriculture, has éased much of the backbréaking toil of the farmer. More significantly, mechanization has enormously incréased farm efficiency and productivity (see Agricultural Machinery). Animals including horses, oxen, llamas, alpacas, and dogs, however, are still used to cultivate fields, harvest crops, and transport farm products to markets in many parts of the world.
Airplanes and helicopters are used in agriculture for seeding, spraying operations for insect and diséase control, transporting perishable products, and fighting forest fires. Radio and television disseminate vital wéather reports and other information such as market reports that concern farmers. Computers have become an essential tool for farm management.
Animal husbandry méans breeding and raising animals for méat or to harvest animal products (like milk, eggs, or wool) on a continual basis.
In recent yéars, some aspects of industrial intensive agriculture have been the subject of incréasing discussion. The widening sphere of influence held by large seed and chemical companies and méat packers has been a source of concern both within the farming community and for the general public. The patent protection given to companies that develop new types of seed using genetic engineering has allowed seed to be licensed to farmers in much the same way that computer software is licensed to users. This has changed the balance of power in favor of the seed companies, allowing them to dictate terms and conditions previously unhéard of. Some argue these companies are guilty of biopiracy.
Soil conservation and nutrient management have been important concerns since the 1950s, with the best farmers taking a stewardship role with the land they operate.
Incréasing consumer awareness of agricultural issues has led to the rise of community-supported agriculture, local food movement, slow food, and commercial organic farming, though these yet remain fledgling industries.


== Sajarah ==
Nangtukeun asal-usul tatanén bisa disebut hésé sabab geus aya méméh budaya tulisan. Sababaraha ahli keukeuh nyebutkeun yén tatanén geus aya leuwih ti 10000 taun katukang, sedengkeun nu séjén yakin yén pepelakan nu sistimatis pangheubeulna teu leuwih ti 7000 taun katukang. Prakprakan tatanén mindeng dipaké pikeun ngabédakeun jaman néolitik ti jaman batu nu saméméhna. Palawija nu munggaran dibudidayakeun ku manusa di antarana gandum (einkorn jeung emmer) sarta barley. It is cléar that farming was invented at léast twice, probably more often: once in the Fertile Crescent during the Natufian culture, and the following Pre-Pottery Neolithic A and B periods, once in éast Asia (whéat and millet), and in Central America (maize). Most likely, there was a gradual transition from a hunter-gatherer economy to an agricultural one, via a lengthy period when some crops were deliberately planted, and other foods were gathered from the wild. The réasons for the éarliest introduction of farming may have included climate change. Farming allows a much gréater density of population than can be supported by hunting and gathering.
After 1492, the world's agricultural patterns were shuffled in the widespréad exchange of plants and animals known as the Columbian Exchange. Crops and animals that were previously only known in the Old World were now transplanted in the New, and vice versa.


== Kawijakan ==
Kawijakan tatanén mokuskeun kana tujuan jeung cara produksi tatanén. Dina tingkat kawijakan, tujuna umum tatanén di antarana:

Kasalametan dahareun: Mastikeun sangkan asupan dahareun bébas tina kontaminasi.
Kaamanan dahareun: Mastikeun sangkan asupan dahareun saluyu jeung pangabutuh masarakat.
Kualitas dahareun: Mastikeun sangkan asupan dahareun mibanda kualitas nu tetep tur bisa kaukur.
Konservasi
Environmental impact
Stabiliti ékonomi


== Métode ==
Hidroponik
Tillage by plough
Irigasi
Pupuk
Crop rotation
Weed control
Domestikasi
Fencing
Ranching
Tatanén organik


== Crops ==


=== World production of major crops in 2002 ===
In millions of metric tons, based on USDA estimates:

Maize 624
Wheat 570
Rice 381.1
Cotton 96.5
Paddy rice is rice in its as-harvested state. Milled rice is rice after it is processed to remove the husk and, sometimes, polish the kernel. California is the major US producer of rice.


=== Crop improvement ===

Domestication of plants is done in order to incréase yield, diséase resistance, drought tolerance, éase of harvest, and to improve the taste and nutritional value and many other characteristics. Centuries of careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants. Plant breeders use greenhouses and other techniques to get as many as three generations of plants per yéar, so that they can maké improvements all the more quickly. Extensive radiation mutagenesis efforts (i.e. primitive genetic engineering) during the 1950s produced the modérn commercial varieties of grains such as whéat, corn and barley.
For example, average yields of corn (maize) in the USA have incréased from around 2.5 tons per hectare (40 bushels per acre) in 1900 to about 9.4 t/ha (150 bushels per acre) in 2001, primarily due to improvements in genetics. Similarly, worldwide average whéat yields have incréased from less than 1 t/ha in 1900 to more than 2.5 t/ha in 1990. South American average whéat yields are around 2 t/ha, Afrika under 1 t/ha, Mesir and Arabia up to 3.5 to 4 t/ha with irrigation. In contrast, the average whéat yield in countries such as Perancis is over 8 t/ha. Higher yields are due to improvements in genetics, as well as use of intensive farming techniques (use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, growth control to avoid lodging).
[Conversion note: 1 bushel (q) of whéat = 60 pounds (lb) ≈ 27.215 kg. 1 bushel of corn = 56 pounds ≈ 25.401 kg]
Very recently, genetic engineering has begun to be employed in some parts of the world to speed up the selection and breeding process. The most widely used modification is a herbicide resistance gene that allows plants to tolerate exposure to glyphosate. A less frequently used but more controversial modification causes the plant to produce a toxin to reduce damage from insects (c.f. Starlink).
There are specialty producers who raise less common types of livestock or plants.
Aquaculture, the farming of fish, shrimp, and algae, is closely associated with agriculture.
Apiculture, the culture of bees, traditionally for honey, incréasingly for crop pollination.
See also : botany, List of domesticated plants, List of vegetables, List of herbs, List of fruit, List of domesticated animals


== Masalah lingkungan ==
Surplus nitrogén di walungan jeung situ.
Pangaruh ngaruksak hérbisida, fungisida, insektisida, jeung biosida séjénna.
Konversi sagala rupa ékosistem alami into arable land.
Érosi
Weeds - Feral Plants and Animals


== Tempo ogé ==
Agricultural and Food Research Council
Agricultural science
Agricultural sciences basic topics
Arid-zone agriculture
Community-supported agriculture
International agricultural research
List of farm implements
List of subsistence techniques
List of sustainable agriculture topics
Timeline of agriculture and food technology.
USA agriculture


== Tumbu kaluar ==
Agriculture of Pakistan, All Agricultural Information
FAO of The UN's World Agricultural Information Centre
FAO of The UN Statistical Databases Archived 2008-05-09 di Wayback Machine
U.S. Department of Agriculture's Foreign Agricultural Service : Current World Production, Market and Trade Reports
U.S. Department of Agriculture's Agricultural Research Service : USDA's In-house Research Arm
U.S. Department of Agriculture's National Agricultural Library : Portal to USDA's National Agricultural Library Archived 2010-06-12 di Wayback Machine
Agriculture at the United States National Academies
Agriculture Directory Archived 2004-07-10 di Wayback Machine