
== Lawen ya rin ==
Insect repellent
Cymbopogon
Mosquito net
DEET
Anti-itch drug
Malaria


== Dalerayan ==


== Suglung Palwal ==

Amuk at the Open Directory Project
Mosquito Pest Control Information - National Pesticide Information Center
West Nile Virus Resource Guide - National Pesticide Information Center
Has anybody died from mosquito bite yet? 
Mosquitoes of Wisconsin  Archived Mayu 16, 2008 at the Wayback Machine
How to Treat a Mosquito Bite Archived Eneru 17, 2008 at the Wayback Machine
Repel Mosquitoes with Vicks VapoRub Archived Pebreru 1, 2008 at the Wayback Machine
Biological Database for Anopheline Mosquitoes
Database for Disease Vectors
New Jersey Mosquito Control Archived Disyembri 18, 2014 at the Wayback Machine
How You Can Help Prevent the Spread of Mosquito-Borne Illnesses Archived Eneru 31, 2008 at the Wayback Machine
Inland Floodwater mosquito Aedes vexans diagnostic photographs and taxonomy
Template:PDF
University  of Florida Public Health Pesticide Applicator Training Manual - Chapter on Mosquitoes
Vertical Flight Capabilities of Mosquitoes
Mosquito Genomics WWW Server Archived Abril 7, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
Mosquitoes - Micscape September 2003
Leung, Diana (2000). Frequency of Mosquito Wings. The Physics Factbook.
Template:PDF
The evolution of DDT resistant mosquitoes
CDC Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases - Information on West Nile virus as well as other mosquito- and tick- bourne diseases.
Florida Medical Entomology Laboratory - A mosquito identification key, along with other helpful information.
Revealed: What mosquitoes hate about humans - mosquito-repellant chemicals in the human sweat have been identified by researchers.
How to Get Rid of Mosquitoes - DIY guide to mosquito control
Mosquito photographs from NSW (New South Wales, Australia) Arbovirus Surveillance Archived Eneru 30, 2008 at the Wayback Machine
Natural Bug Sprays: How Effective Are They? Archived Marsu 2, 2007 at the Wayback Machine
Walter Reed Biosystematics Unit. - Links to the online mosquito catalog, keys for mosquito identification, images and information on medically important species and much more.
Repellents, Traps, Virus Information, Maps, etc Archived Marsu 4, 2008 at the Wayback Machine Florida and National information
Alameda County Mosquito Abatement Archived Pebreru 1, 2008 at the Wayback Machine
European Mosquito Bulletin